Ablations:

We have presented ablations on three decisions: The Window size, The temporal columns, and the physics-aware mechanism. All the ablations are reported on the Physics-Aware ANN model trained on 70 scenarios and tested on 15 scenarios.

Window-Size:
The Windowing function provides a temporal context to the model, without needing recurrent layers. Table 10 shows the detection metrics for window size = 1, 6 and 12.
The metrics improve on increasing the window size, and hence a window of 12 timestamps is chosen (6 hours). It is to be noted that on further increasing the size, the increase in the metrics diminish, and hence a more longer window may not provide the improvements that are justified for an exponential increase in model parameters.

Temporal columns:
Table 11 shows that the sin_hour and cos_hour columns provide an improved model with better  recall, f1 and accuracy for a minute trade-off in precision.

Physics-Aware mechanism:
How physics is integrated into the model can be categorised into 2 types:
Loss-Only: The Physics Loss is added to the classification loss, but the leak head recieves no features from the predicted flow and pressue.
Coupling: Along with the Physics Loss, the leak head recieves 5 additional numerical features (mean, std, range) derived from the flow and pressure prediction head.
Table 12 shows that the model with coupling provides an increase of 0.02 in F1 over the loss-only model.

XGBOOST:
To see if the detection problem can be solved using classical machine learning techniques, an XGBoost classifiers was trained on the same windowed dataset.
Table 9 presents the results for XGBoost classifiers with N-estimators = 50 and 100, tested at threshold 0.5 and at the optimal threshold derived by ROC-AUC (approximately 0.44 for both).
While XGBoost performs decently, it lags behind both the base ANN and the physics-aware ANN.
We can also see that the higher false negative rates of the classifiers are due to them being purely data-driven, and hence not gauranteeing conservation of mass and energy.
Thus this makes the ANN models, especially the Physics-Aware ANN suitable for deployment due to its embedding of hydraulic constraints.

Sensitivity Analysis:

To assess model performance with change in Demand, Pressure and Flow, we perform a two-dimensional sensitivity analysis over demand pertubation alpha belongs to [-0.15, 0.15] and pressure-demand coupling strength beta belongs to [0.2, 1.0].
The formulae are:
Demand_new = Demand(1 + alpha)
Flow_new  = Flow(1 + alpha)
Pressure_new = Pressure(1 - beta*alpha)

These formulae are used keeping in mind the corelations shown by the data heatmap.

Figure 14 shows the worst case F1 (minimum over all beta), and we can see that for negative demand shifts, the ANN degrades much more steeply as compared to the physics-aware ANN. At alpha = -0.15, the ANN drops to an F1 of 0.17 whereas the physics-aware ANN holds at 0.31.
For positive demand shift, both models show similar performance and the metrics are almost constant for alpha belongs to [0.05, 0.15].

Figure 15 shows the performance of both models at an extreme demand shift (alpha = 0.15), for varying beta.
As we can see, the physics-aware ANN degrades gradually here, whereas the base ANN drops steeply from beta = 0.4, where the F1 for both is approx 0.7, but at beta at 0.6, the physics-aware ANN shows an F1 of 0.6 (approx), but the base ANN drops to an F1 of 0.4 (approx.)

As the physics-aware ANN embeds hydraulic constraints during training, even with data shifts that may not follow the conservation of mass and energy, it holds its own in prediction, whereas the ANN degrades drastically due to it being purely data-driven.